Fermilab is one of the preeminent particle
physics laboratories in the world.
You might well have known that.
But you might not know just exactly why I
can say that with such confidence.
It turns out that there are a lot of reasons,
from having some of the finest accelerator
and magnet experts on the planet, to conducting
research at the highest energies accessible,
to searching for the cosmically-elusive dark
matter and dark energy.
But it is Fermilab’s neutrino research program
in which it is the unquestioned leader.
Fermilab currently can generate the most intense
neutrino beams on the planet and use them
to study subtle behaviors of the universe’s
legendarily shy particles.
And Fermilab is the host laboratory for an
experiment called DUNE, which will send a
beam of neutrinos to a massive neutrino detector
that will be located in South Dakota.
Neutrinos interact very rarely with ordinary
matter.
That’s their defining signature.
And yet, studying them has led to many surprises
over the last 50 years.
We’ve learned that matter and antimatter
have different behaviors, and we’ve found
that neutrinos can actually change their identity
in a cyclical pattern that we call neutrino
oscillation.
Researchers are confident that neutrinos haven’t
yielded all of their secrets, which is why
many members of the Fermilab scientific staff
have devoted their time to neutrino research.
With neutrinos, energy isn’t the name of
the game.
That’s because high and low energy neutrinos
exhibit the same kinds of behaviors.
Instead, what matters is the number of neutrinos
traveling in your beam per second.
The reason is simple.
Neutrinos interact extremely rarely.
To give you a sense of scale, for every hundred
billion neutrinos that hit a typical detector
located on the Fermilab campus, only one interacts.
The only way to get more interactions to study
is to simply generate more neutrinos.
The way you make a beam of neutrinos is to
accelerate a beam of protons to very high
speeds and smash them into a target.
Protons in, and after a few intermediary steps,
neutrinos come out.
That’s how it works.
I even made a video on the process.
So Fermilab scientists started looking into
how they could generate more intense beams
of protons.
As you might expect, the discussion was very
technical.
By the way, I’m going to talk as if we simply
accelerate protons throughout the complex,
but it’s more complicated than that.
Maybe I’ll make a future video on those
details.
For now, imagine that the beam is only protons,
but realize that there’s more to the story.
We talk of the Fermilab accelerator as if
it's just a single thing, but it actually
consists of four very distinct accelerators,
each designed to work at different speeds.
We have the low energy accelerator, called
the preaccelerator.
We have the medium energy accelerator, called
the linear accelerator, or LINAC.
We have the high energy accelerator, which
is called the Booster.
And we have the very high energy accelerator,
which is called the Main Injector.
When each accelerator was evaluated, it was
immediately apparent that the one that was
limiting the ability to make intense beams
of protons is the LINAC.
That’s not so surprising.
The LINAC is one of the first devices that
operated at Fermilab.
It first saw beam in 1970 and the technology
is from the 1950s and 60s.
It was never designed to perform under the
conditions required by an accelerator operating
in the 2020s and beyond.
There was no way to make small modifications
to the existing LINAC.
In order to perform as required, it needed
to be replaced by an entirely new device.
We call this effort PIP-II, short for Proton
Improvement Plan.
PIP-I was an earlier effort that made smaller
improvements to the facility.
Those tweaks resulted in the world class accelerators
Fermilab hosts today, but a different approach
was needed to take it to the next level.
PIP-II will entirely replace the old LINAC
with a new one.
And, to maximize the increase in performance,
we’ll replace the preaccelerator as well.
So how will the PIP-II LINAC be better?
Well, perhaps most importantly, the core technology
will be modernized.
Particle accelerators all work more or less
in the same way.
Strong electric fields are used to push electrically
charged particles and make them go faster
and faster.
Radio waves are beamed into devices called
cavities.
When the radio waves enter the cavities, they
make extremely strong oscillating electric
fields.
By the way, the jargon for this is RF cavities.
RF stands for “radio frequency,” but it
just means radio waves.
For technical reasons, the fields have to
oscillate.
If you want to know why, you could look at
the video I made on it, or you can just trust
me here.
The original LINAC cavities were metal, and
they operated at room temperature.
However, when the radio waves entered the
cavities, those waves induced electrical currents
in the walls of the cavities, which caused
them to heat up.
It’s not all that different than if you
put a spoon in your microwave.
If you did that, you’d find that the spoon
would get extremely hot.
Don’t do that by the way- it’s very bad
for it.
And, when you think about it, all that energy
that is going into heating up the metal doesn’t
go into accelerating your beam.
So, first, it’s wasted energy that you have
to pay for, and second, it’s possible to
heat up metal so much that it will simply
melt and become useless.
So you have to cool the cavities.
And you turn on and off the radio waves to
give the cavities a little time to cool off.
It’s really not the best way to do it.
In PIP-II, scientists make cavities out of
superconductors.
Superconductors are metals that have no resistance
and thus don’t heat up when immersed in
radio waves.
So essentially all of the radio waves shot
into the cavities can go into accelerating
the particles.
This also means that you don’t have to turn
the radio waves on and off.
You could leave them on all the time and constantly
send beam through.
Because of considerations arising from other
accelerator components, we won’t send beam
through PIP-II constantly, although we’ll
keep the radio waves on all of the time.
The PIP-II LINAC will be double the energy
of the existing facility- 800 million electron
volts instead of 400.
So what’s the bottom line?
How is the new facility going to compare to
the old one?
Is it as different as this- and this?
Well, no, of course not.
And that’s a trickier question to answer
than you might think.
It depends on the measuring stick.
For instance, one number is that the new LINAC
is capable of accelerating nearly 200 times
more protons per second compared to the existing
one.
If other things didn’t matter, that'd be
the answer.
But other things do matter.
There’s an entire accelerator complex and
other limitations must be taken into account.
When we step back and look at the entire facility,
perhaps the right way to look it is to simply
ask how many protons are available to do research.
The current accelerator complex can deliver
0.7 megawatts of proton power.
When the PIP-II upgrade is complete, it will
deliver 1.2 megawatts, or nearly double.
When you get to that much power, limitations
in the fifty year old booster accelerator
start to come into play.
Fermilab’s accelerator scientists are already
thinking about ways to build a modern booster.
When that is accomplished, the Fermilab accelerator
complex will be able to deliver 2.4 megawatts
of power, or pushing four times what we can
do today.
And this will then result in generating the
world’s most intense beam of neutrinos,
which we will study in the DUNE experiment.
It’s probably worth asking how this is all
going to happen.
Is this ambitious upgrade something we know
how to do?
Well, first, I should say that the Fermilab
accelerator experts are second to none.
So yeah- yeah.
We can do it.
But I should also say that the project is
technically very challenging and there is
nothing a good scientist or engineer likes
more than technically challenging project.
Because of that, other groups of world-class
accelerator experts are collaborating with
us.
Researchers from France, Great Britain, India,
and Italy, and other countries are already
making important contributions.
Some of those scientists have moved to the
U.S. to immerse themselves in the project.
They’re still employed by their home institution,
but they want to be where the action is.
From a project point of view, some of the
replacement RF cavities exist and are being
qualified.
PIP-II consists of five distinct different
types of cavities, each optimized to work
at a different velocity as the beam moves
to about 85% the speed of light.
Each different set of cavities acts like a
gear in a car.
A working prototype of the preaccelerator
is undergoing evaluation.
And, in the spring of 2019, groundbreaking
will occur for the buildings that will house
this fantastic upgrade to an already world-class
facility.
Thinking more broadly, the technology being
developed for the PIP-II upgrade has an incredible
amount of applicability in industry, in such
fields as medicine, nuclear energy, and material
science, as well as, of course, other laboratories
who want to use it to perform basic research.
Fermilab is a legend in the particle physics
world and has been for fifty years.
With the PIP-II upgrade, Fermilab’s future
is looking even more fantastic for its second
half-century.
Well, that was fun.
It’s always amazing to see a scientific
facility take a huge step forward.
If you like what you saw, be sure to like,
subscribe and share.
And be certain to click on the little bell
icon you see down there.
That’s the only way you’ll be guaranteed
to be notified for the release of every video
that we make about Fermilab physics.
And how could you not?
Because, as you know- physics is everything.